Update sl-graphql.md (#3914)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/sl-graphql.md

## dbt Semantic Layer GraphQL API

The dbt Semantic Layer GraphQL API allows you to explore and query metrics and dimensions. Due to it's self-documenting nature, you can explore the calls conveniently through the [schema explorer](https://semantic-layer.cloud.getdbt.com/api/graphql).

dbt Partners can use the Semantic Layer GraphQL API to build and integration with the dbt Semantic Layer.

## Requirements to use the GraphQL API

> - A dbt cloud project on dbt v1.6 or higher

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dbt Cloud project on dbt v1.6 or higher
```

- Metrics are defined and configured

> - A dbt Cloud [service token](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/service-tokens) that has Semantic Layer access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dbt Cloud [service token](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/service-tokens with "Semantic Layer Only” and "Metadata Only" permissions
```

dbt Partners can use the Semantic Layer GraphQL API to build and integration with the dbt Semantic Layer.

## Requirements to use the GraphQL API

> - A dbt cloud project on 1.6+

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dbt cloud project on dbt v1.6 or higher
```

- Metrics are defined and configured

> - A dbt Cloud Service Token that has semantic layer access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dbt Cloud [service token](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/service-tokens) that has Semantic Layer access
```

> - Connection to the data warehouse is configured in the project

Reviewer: switch to active voice so it's easier for translation and nonenglish users

```suggestion
- Your dbt project is configured and connected to a data platform
```

{"Authorization": "Bearer <SERVICE TOKEN>"}
```

Each GQL request also requires a dbt Cloud `environmentId`. The API uses both the service token in the header and environmentId for authentication.

### Metadata calls

**Fetch Data Platform Dialect** 

In some cases in your application, it may be useful to know the dialect/data platform that's being used under the hood for the dbt Semantic Layer connection (e.g., if you are building where filters from a GUI rather than user-inputted SQL) The GraphQL API has an easy way to fetch this via the following query: 

```graphql
{
    environmentInfo(environmentId: BigInt!) {
            dialect
    }
}
```

**Fetch available metrics**

```graphql
metrics(environmentId: BigInt!): [Metric!]!
```

**Fetch available dimensions for metrics**

```graphql
dimensions(
  environmentId: BigInt!
  metrics: [String!]!
): [Dimension!]!
```

**Fetch available granularities given metrics**

Note: This call for `queryableGranularities` returns only queryable granularities for metric time - the primary time dimension across all metrics selected.

```graphql
queryableGranularities(
  environmentId: BigInt!
  metrics: [String!]!
): [TimeGranularity!]!
```

> You can also get queryable granularities for all other dimensions using the `dimensions` call:

Author: @courtneyholcomb  do you think you can add a "fetch what agg_time_dimension" example makes up metric time before or after this example? I wasn't quite sure how to structure it.

Reviewer 2: Yep I'll add a commit to this PR!

Reviewer 2: Done!

    limit: 10	
  ) {
    queryId
  }
}
```

**Query with Explain** 

This takes the same inputs as the `createQuery` mutation.

```graphql
mutation {
  compileSql(
    environmentId: BigInt!
    metrics: [{name:"food_order_amount"} {name:"order_gross_profit"}]
    groupBy: [{name:"metric_time, grain:"month"}, {name:"customer__customer_type"}]
  ) {
    sql
  }
}
```

### Output Format & Pagination

**Output Format**

By default, output provided is in Arrow format. You can use the following parameter to convert to JSON. Due to performance limitations, we recommend the JSON parameter be only used for testing and validation. The JSON returned is a base64 encoded string. This means to access the JSON you must run it through a base64 decoder then you should receive the results in JSON. This is a JSON generated from pandas, this means you can either parse this back into a dataframe via pandas.read_json(json, orient="table") or just use the data directly with json["data"] and get the table schema with json["schema"]["fields"]

```graphql
{
  query(environmentId: BigInt!, queryId: Int!, pageNum: Int {
    sql
    status
    error
    totalPages
    arrowResult

>     jsonResult (orient: table)

Reviewer 3: this should be `orient: TABLE` uppercase

```graphql
metricsForDimensions(
  environmentId: BigInt!
  dimensions: [String!]!
): [Metric!]!
```

**Create Dimension Values query**

```graphql

mutation createDimensionValuesQuery(
  environmentId: BigInt!
  metrics: [String!]
  groupBy: [String!]!
): CreateDimensionValuesQueryResult!

```

**Create Metric query**

```graphql
createQuery(
environmentId: BigInt!
metrics: [String!]!
group_by: [String!] = null
limit: Int = null
where: [String] = null
order: [String!] = null
): CreateQueryResult
```

**Fetch query result**
```graphql
query(
  environmentId: BigInt!
  queryId: String!
): QueryResult!
```

**Metric Types**

```graphql
Metric {
	name: String!
	description: String
	type: MetricType!
	typeParams: MetricTypeParams!
	filter: WhereFilter
	dimensions: [Dimension!]!
  queryableGranularities: [TimeGranularity!]!
}
```

```
MetricType = [SIMPLE, RATIO, CUMULATIVE, DERIVED]
```

**Metric Type Parameters**

```graphql
MetricTypeParams {
	measure: MetricInputMeasure
	inputMeasures: [MetricInputMeasure!]!
	numerator: MetricInput
	denominator: MetricInput
	expr: String
	window: MetricTimeWindow
	grainToDate: TimeGranularity
	metrics: [MetricInput!]
}
```

**Dimension Types**

> todo: add info on granularity when we expose it

Reviewer: hey @WilliamDee and @courtneyholcomb, this section seems like it's missing granularity info -  is that something either one of you can add please?

Reviewer 3: Oh woops, forgot to remove this, this is done right down below with the addition of
```
queryableGranularities: [TimeGranularity!]!
```

    groupBy: [{name:"metric_time, grain: "month"}, {name: "customer__customer_type"}]
    limit: 10	
  ) {
    queryId
  }
}
```

**Query with Explain** 

This takes the same inputs as the `createQuery` mutation.

```graphql
mutation {
  compileSql(
    environmentId: BigInt!
    metrics: [{name:"food_order_amount"} {name:"order_gross_profit"}]
    groupBy: [{name:"metric_time, grain:"month"}, {name:"customer__customer_type"}]
  ) {
    sql
  }
}
```

### Output Format & Pagination

**Output Format**

By default, output provided is in Arrow format. You can use the following parameter to convert to JSON. Due to performance limitations, we recommend the JSON parameter be only used for testing and validation. The JSON returned is a base64 encoded string. This means to access the JSON you must run it through a base64 decoder then you should receive the results in JSON. This is a JSON generated from pandas, this means you can either parse this back into a dataframe via pandas.read_json(json, orient="table") or just use the data directly with json["data"] and get the table schema with json["schema"]["fields"]

```graphql
{

>   query(environmentId: BigInt!, queryId: Int!, pageNum: Int {

Reviewer: hey @WilliamDee @courtneyholocomb - should pageNum: Int include an exclamation?

Reviewer 3: Nope it isn't required, it's defaulted to 1

```graphql
{
  query(environmentId: BigInt!, queryId: Int!, pageNum: Int! = 1) {
    sql
    status
    error
    totalPages
    arrowResult
    jsonResult(orient: PandasJsonOrient! = TABLE, encoded: Boolean! = true)
  }
}
```

The results default to the table but you can change it to any [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.to_json.html) supported value. 

**Pagination**

By default, we return 1024 rows per page. If your result set exceeds this, you need to increase the page number using the `pageNum` option.

### Run a Python query

The `arrowResult` in the GraphQL query response is a byte dump, which isn't visually useful. You can convert this byte data into an Arrow table using any Arrow-supported language. Refer to the following Python example explaining how to query and decode the arrow result:

> The `arrowResult` from the GraphQL query response isn't all that useful visually as it's a byte dump. You can utilize any language that supports Arrow to convert that byte into a Arrow table. Here is an example of querying and decoding the arrow result in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

dimension: String!
```

> ### Metric Query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Metric query
```

```graphql
query(
		environmentId: BigInt!
		queryId: String!
): QueryResult!
```

> **Create Query**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Create query**
```

dimension: String!
```

### Metric queries

```graphql
query(
environmentId: BigInt!
queryId: String!
): QueryResult!
```

**Create query**

```graphql
createQuery(
environmentId: Int!
metrics: [String!]!
dimensions: [String!] = null
limit: Int = null

> where: [String] = null

Author: @WilliamDee  is this correct now?

Author: Also, should we add Explain here?

Reviewer 3: Yup, the where should be list now. still abit of discussion on the explain, we may plan on adding compileSql endpoint instead of explain.

Author: Ah cool! Should we create a task for this in linear? I did see the explain one but not the compile one.

 
 - `Dimension()` - This is used for any categorical or time dimensions. If used for a time dimension, granularity is required -  `Dimension('metric_time').grain('week')` or `Dimension('customer__country')`
- `Entity()` - used for entities like primary and foreign keys - `Entity('order_id')`

Note: If you prefer more strongly typed `where` clause, you can optionally use `TimeDimension` to separate out categorical dimensions from time ones. The `TimeDimension` input takes the time dimension name and also requires granularity - an example is `TimeDimension('metric_time', 'MONTH')`.

```graphql
mutation {
	createQuery(
		metrics:["order_total"]
		groupBy:["customer__customer_type"]
		where:["{{ Dimension('customer__customer_type') }} = 'new'", "{{ TimeDimension('metric_time', 'MONTH') }} > '2022-10-01'"] - TODO UPDATE THIS
	) {
	queryId
	}
}
```

**Query with Limit and Order By** 

```graphql
mutation {
  createQuery(
    environmentId: <env_id>
    metrics: ["food_order_amount", "order_gross_profit"]
    groupBy: ["metric_time__month", "customer__customer_type)] - TODO update with syntax for object

>     limit: TODO

Author: @WilliamDee  do you have an example of what limit/order looks like?

Reviewer 3: Both order and limit will work exactly the same as the JDBC one, so something like
- `limit: Optional[int]` ie., `limit: 10` for limiting the result to 10 rows
- `order: Optional[List[str]]` ie., `order=['-order_gross_profit', "metric_time__month"]` the `-` is for ordering in DESC

Author: @WilliamDee  thanks! wait so does order need the order name before the colon as well as the order outside of the list bracket?

I would assume it would be 

order: ["-revenue"] rather than order: order=['revenue']

    orderBy: TODO
	
  ) {
    queryId
  }
}
```

**Query with Explain** 

```graphql
mutation {
  createQuery(
    environmentId: <env_id>
    metrics: ["food_order_amount", "order_gross_profit"]
    groupBy: ["metric_time__month", "customer__customer_type)] - TODO update with syntax for object

>     explain: TODO

Author: @WilliamDee do you have an example with "explain?"

Reviewer 3: Reference the comment above about explain vs compileSql!

): String
```

**Compile from Jinja**

```graphql
compileSqlFromJinja(

> 		environmentId: BigIn!

Reviewer 3: BigInt*

> 		environmentId: BigIn!

Reviewer: adding @WilliamDee 's sugg

```suggestion
		environmentId: BigInt!
```

**Pagination**

By default, we return 1024 rows per page. If your result set exceeds this, you need to increase the page number using the `pageNum` option.

> ### Execute a Query through Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run a Python query
```

> The `arrowResult` from the GraphQL query response isn't all that useful visually as it's a byte dump. You can utilize any language that supports Arrow to convert that byte into a Arrow table. Here is an example of querying and decoding the arrow result in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `arrowResult` in the GraphQL query response is a byte dump, which isn't visually useful. You can convert this byte data into an Arrow table using any Arrow-supported language. Refer to the following Python example explaining how to query and decode the arrow result:

The `arrowResult` from the GraphQL query response isn't all that useful visually as it's a byte dump. You can utilize any language that supports Arrow to convert that byte into a Arrow table. Here is an example of querying and decoding the arrow result in Python.
```

```python
import base64
import pyarrow as pa

headers = {"Authorization":"Bearer <token>"}
query_result_request = """
{
  query(environmentId: 70, queryId: "12345678") {
    sql
    status
    error
    arrowResult
  }
}
"""

gql_response = requests.post(
  "http://localhost:8000/graphql",
  json={"query": query_result_request},
  headers=headers,
)

"""
gql_response.json() => 
{
  "data": {
    "query": {
      "sql": "SELECT\n  ordered_at AS metric_time__day\n  , SUM(order_total) AS order_total\nFROM semantic_layer.orders orders_src_1\nGROUP BY\n  ordered_at",
      "status": "SUCCESSFUL",
      "error": null,
      "arrowResult": "arrow-byte-data"
    }
  }
}
"""

def to_arrow_table(byte_string: str) -> pa.Table:
  """Get a raw base64 string and convert to an Arrow Table."""
  with pa.ipc.open_stream(base64.b64decode(res)) as reader:
    return pa.Table.from_batches(reader, reader.schema)

arrow_table = to_arrow_table(gql_response.json()["data"]["query"]["arrowResult"])

> # Perform whatever functionality is available e.g.,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Perform whatever functionality is available, like convert to a pandas table.
```

> # Convert to a pandas table

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
